---
slug: "kuzu-0.5.1-release"
title: "Kùzu 0.5.1 Release"
description: "Release announcement for Kùzu 0.5.1"
pubDate: "August 15 2024"
heroImage: "/img/default.png"
categories: ["release"]
authors: ["team"]
tags: ["cypher"]
---

This release comes with a bunch of bug fixes and several new features and improvements.

## In-memory Mode
Kùzu now supports both on-disk and in-memory modes. 
If not specify the database path or specify it as `:memory:`, Kùzu will be opened under **in-memory** mode.

Differences between on-disk and in-memory mode are:
- When operating under on-disk mode, all data will be persisted to disk. All transactions are logged in the Write-Ahead Log (WAL), in which any changes will be merged into the database files during checkpoints.
- When operating under in-memory mode, there are **no writes to the WAL**, and no data is persisted to disk (so `CHECKPOINT` will do nothing). All data is lost when the process finishes.

Due to above differences, in-memory mode and on-disk mode can present different performance characteristics.
The following table shows performance numbers of COPY of the `Comment` table, full table scan over `Comment`, and two hop joins over `Knows` on the ldbc-100 dataset, and 1M insertions (each insert of a node is an auto-transaction) on a node table. All experiments are done on a server with 384GB RAM, 2TB SSD, and 2 Intel Xeon Platinum 8175M CPUs.

```cypher
// COPY
COPY Comment FROM 'ldbc/ldbc-100/csv/comment_0_0.csv' (DELIM="|", HEADER=true);
// Scan
MATCH (c:Comment) RETURN MIN(c.ID), MIN(c.creationDate), MIN(c.locationIP), MIN(c.browserUsed), MIN(c.content), MIN(c.length);
// 2-hop Join
MATCH (a:Person)-[:knows]->(b:Person)-[:knows]->(c:Person) RETURN MIN(a.birthday), MIN(b.birthday), MIN(c.birthday);
// Insert
CREATE NODE TABLE nodeT(id INT64, name STRING, age INT64, net_worth FLOAT, PRIMARY KEY (id));
// Pass each record's values as parameters as an individual transaction
CREATE (:nodeT {id: $id, name: $name, age: $age, net_worth: $net_worth})
```

| mode       |        on-disk (ms)       |     in-mem (ms)   |
| ---------- | ------------------------- | ----------------- |
| COPY       |     34586                 | 14798             |
| Scan       | 5330 (cold) / 1801 (warm) | 1896              |
| 2-hop Join |  950 (cold) / 899 (warm)  | 904               |  
| Insert     | 79313                     | 47814             |

From the table, we can see that:
- the performance of COPY and large scans during cold runs are much improved under the in-memory mode comared to the on-disk one due to zero disk I/Os.
- for large scans during warms runs, the performance difference between the two modes is neligible (*1896ms vs. 1801ms*), since needed pages are already cached in our buffer manager.
- for 2-hop joins, the scans on disk are small, thus performance difference is small too.
- the performance of insertions is greatly improved due to no writes to the WAL, which involves writing and syncing the disk file.

The ideal usage scenario of in-memory mode is when you don't bother persisting your graphs. In-memory mode can further improve the performance for COPY and write heavy workloads.

## Performance Improvements on Windows and New Output Modes for Shell
We fixed a performance bug on Windows.
TODO: More details to fill here.

We added more output modes to the Kùzu shell.
The default mode is `box`, which shows tables drawn in unicode box-drawing characters.
In this release, we added more modes, such as csv, html, json, latex, markdown, table, tsv, etc. Please check our docs [here](https://docs.kuzudb.com/client-apis/cli/) for more details.
