---
slug: "kuzu-0.5.0-release"
title: "Kùzu 0.5.0 Release"
description: "Release announcement for Kùzu 0.5.0"
pubDate: "July 31 2024"
heroImage: "/img/default.png"
categories: ["release"]
authors: ["team"]
tags: ["cypher", "extensions"]
---

It's been a productive summer for Kùzu Inc., and we are really excited to announce the release of
Kùzu **0.5.0**! In this post, we'll describe a host of new features, improvements and extensions that
are available to users in this major release. Without any further ado, let's dive in!

## Features

### Remote databases

You can now attach a remote Kùzu database through `httpfs` extension and use it as if it is a local
database. For now, we only support read-only operations on remote databases. For example:

```sql
ATTACH 's3://kuzu-example/university' AS uw (dbtype kuzu);
```
In the above command, we attach a Kùzu database located at `s3://kuzu-example/university` as `uw`.
We can now query the remote database as though it were a local database. Note that because the
database sits on object storage, the query performance may be slower than a local database.

The primary intent behind this feature is to allow users to create backups of their databases on S3
as they see fit, without having to necessarily download the database to their local machines to query
historical data. For use cases where latency is important (e.g., to serve current data for analytics),
it is recommended to download the database to the machine from which it is being queried. In the future,
we plan to support more convenience features for remote databases, so that users can more easily
manage and deploy their databases on the cloud.

### Python UDFs

Earlier, we supported user-defined functions via the C++ API. In this release, we've extended the UDF functionality
to Python users as well. You can now register Python UDFs and use them in your queries.

To register a python UDF, it's required to provide both a function signature and implementation. An
example is shown below:

```python
# define your function
def difference(a, b):
    return a - b

# define the expected type of your parameters
parameters = [kuzu.Type.INT64, kuzu.Type.INT64]

# define expected type of the returned value
return_type = kuzu.Type.INT64

# register the UDF
conn.create_function("difference", difference, parameters, return_type)
```

Once registered, python UDF can be used as a regular function

```cypher
RETURN difference(2, 1)
```

In the above example, we define a function `difference` that takes two integers and returns their difference.
We then register this function with the Kùzu connection object `conn`. Finally, we use the function in a Cypher query.

The main intent behind this feature is to allow users to write custom functions in Python for use
cases where the equivalent functionality doesn't exist in Cypher. However, it's recommended to look for Cypher
equivalents before writing UDFs in Python, as there are performance implications to performing tasks in
Python. If you find that your Python UDf isn't meeting performance requirements and you need a commonly
used query pattern in Cypher, reach out to us on [Discord](https://kuzudb.com/chat) to discuss further.

### Direct scan from Polars, PyArrow & SQLite

In prior releases, we could scan from Pandas DataFrames to avoid persisting in-memory data to disk at
the time of ingestion. We are happy to announce that we've now extended this functionality to Polars,
via the PyArrow interface. In version 0.5.0, we can directly scan from Polars DataFrames and PyArrow tables
just like we do with Pandas DataFrames.

```python
import polars as pl

df = pl.DataFrame({
    "name": ["Adam", "Karissa", "Zhang"],
    "age": [30, 40, 50]
})

res = conn.execute("LOAD FROM df RETURN *")
print(res.get_as_pl())
```

To scan PyArrow
``` python
import pyarrow as pa

pa_table = pa.table({
    "name": ["Adam", "Karissa", "Zhang"],
    "age": [30, 40, 50]
})

res = conn.execute("LOAD FROM pa_table RETURN *")
print(res.get_as_arrow())
```

## New Extensions

This release introduces some new extensions to Kùzu, which allow users to interact with a variety of data sources
to bring their data into a Kùzu graph.

### SQLite scanner

SQLite is one of the most popular RDBMS systems, and we now support scanning data from tables that
reside in SQLite databases. Allowing users to scan data from SQLite means that you can directly
ingest data from SQLite databases into Kùzu without having to export the data to CSV or another format. 

To use this feature, first install and load the SQLite extension:

```sql
INSTALL sqlite;
LOAD EXTENSION sqlite;
```

Attach a SQLite database by specifying the `dbtype` as `sqlite`:

```sql
ATTACH 'university.db' AS uw (dbtype sqlite);
```

Once the SQLite databases is attached, you can access its tables directly in Kùzu. The following
command scans a table named `person` in the `uw` database that sits in SQLite.

```cypher
LOAD FROM uw.person RETURN *
```

### JSON support

JSON is a common data format that's used at the application layer in many systems. In this release, we've
extended Kùzu to support scanning and ingesting data from JSON files, as well as writing data from
Kùzu tables to JSON files. We hope that this feature will make it easier for users to work with JSON
data either upstream or downstream of Kùzu.

JSON is now a natively supported data type in Kùzu. To scan a JSON file, use the following command:

```sql
LOAD FROM 'data.json' RETURN *;
```

To ingest data from a JSON file, you can do the following:

```sql
CREATE NODE TABLE Example (a INT64, b STRING[], c DATE, PRIMARY KEY (a));
COPY Example FROM 'data.json';
```

A query result can also be exported to a JSON file as follows:
```sql
COPY (match (n:Example) return t.*) TO 'data2.json';
```

JSON can also be used as you do any other data type in the system. To define a table with JSON columns,
you can now use the following syntax:
```sql
CREATE NODE TABLE Example2 (id INT64, col1 JSON, PRIMARY KEY id);
```

### Data types

#### Decimal
You can now represent floating point numbers with `DECIMAL` data type when exact precision is required. Decimal data type is defined as `DECIMAL(precision, scale)`, where `precision` is the total number of digits and `scale` is the number of digits to the right of the decimal point.

#### User-defined types

You can also create their own data type through an existing data type, e.g.
```
CREATE TYPE BIGINT AS INT64;
CREATE NODE TABLE Person (id BIGINT, name STRING, age BIGINT, PRIMARY KEY(id));
```

### Others

#### Create sequence

On top of `SERIAL` data type, we add `SEQUENCE` whose range and step can be cutomized in the create statement. The following example shows how to create, read and update a sequence
```cypher
CREATE SEQUENCE Seq INCREMENT 1 MINVALUE 1 NO MAXVALUE START 1;
RETURN nextval('Seq');
RETURN currval('Seq');
```

#### Create table if not exists
By default, Kùzu throw an exception when trying to create a table whose name already exists in the database. You can use `CREATE ... IF NOT EXISTS` to avoid confliction. E.g.
```cypher
CREATE NODE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS UW(ID INT64, PRIMARY KEY(ID));
```

#### Drop table if exists
Similar to the above case, user can drop table only if it exists. E.g.
```cypher
DROP TABLE IF EXISTS UW;
```

#### List lambda function
We added three list lambda functions
```cypher
RETRUN list_transform([1,2,3], x->x+1);
RETURN list_filter([1,2,3], x->x>1);
RETURN list_reduce([1,2,3], (x,y)->x+y) 
``` 

#### Progress bar in CLI and Kùzu Explorers
For long running queries, user can enable progress bar through
```
CALL progress_bar=true;
```

Progress bar is currently available in CLI and explorer.

#### C-API improvements
We made several improvements over C APIs in this release.

- Replace return values with out parameters, simplifying object reuse.
- Make functions that may fail now return a kuzu_state value, streamlining error handling. 
- Add data type utility functions such as `kuzu_date_t`, `kuzu_timestamp_t`, and `kuzu_interval_t`.

#### Hint join order
Picking an optimal join order can be challenging when it comes to a large query graph. In case the optimizer picks a sub-optimal plan, user can use join order hints to by-pass optimizer and enforce a specific join order. E.g. for the following query the optimizer will pick a plan that scans from `a` due the predicate

```
MATCH (a)-[e]->(b)
WHERE a.ID = 0
RETURN *;
```
one can instead force a plan that scans from `b` with following hint.
```
MATCH (a)-[e]->(b)
WHERE a.ID = 0
HITN a JOIN (e JOIN b)
RETURN *;
```
It is also possible to hint a multi-way join.
```
MATCH (a:person)<-[e1:knows]-(b:person)-[e2:knows]->(c:person), (a)-[e3:knows]->(c)
HINT (((a JOIN e1) JOIN b) MULTI_JOIN e2 MULTI_JOIN e3) JOIN c
RETURN COUNT(*)
```


## Performance improvements

### Transaction Improvements

Kùzu had sveral limitations on transactions. The biggest one is we immediately checkpoint after each write transaction, which pauses the entire system and merge writes in the write-ahead log (WAL) into database files. This limitation slows down small write transactions a lot as it leads to more disk I/Os and can trigger re-compressing column chunks (for our compression and column storage layout, please see https://blog.kuzudb.com/post/kuzu-0.1.0-release/).

In this release, we start to rework our transaction and concurrency-control mechanism towards [MVCC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multiversion_concurrency_control), inspired by core ideas from [Fast Serializable Multi-Version Concurrency Control for Main-Memory Database Systems](https://db.in.tum.de/~muehlbau/papers/mvcc.pdf).
Though we still limit write transactions to be non-concurrent in this version, checkpoint is now done automatically based on the WAL size, which can be configured through `CALL checkpoint_threshold=x`. By default, the threshold value is 16MB.
Manual checkpoint can be forced through `CHECKPOINT` statement when there is no active transactions in the system.

We show the performance difference below on 100K insertions into a node table.
```
Person (id INT64, name STRING, age INT64, net_worth FLOAT, PRIMARY KEY (id));
```
Each insertion itself is an auto transaction. Queries are executed through a single Kùzu connection. The experiment is done on a Mac Mini desktop with Apple M2 Pro CPU and 32GB DRAM. 

| branch    | Time (s) |
| --------- | -------- |
| v0.4.2    | 109.9    |
| v0.5      | 7.5      |

In the next pahse, we will focus on the full support of MVCC with no limitation of concurrent read and write transactions.

### Remote file system system cache

## Closing Remarks

As always, we have only scratched the surface of listing the many new features and improvements in Kùzu v0.5.0 in
this blog post. For a more comprehensive list, check out our [release notes](https://github.com/kuzudb/kuzu/releases/tag/v0.5.0)
on GitHub.

Our many thanks go out to the entire Kùzu team for their hard work in making this release possible. Hopefully,
you find that the new features and improvements enhance your graph workflows and allow you to more easily
get your graph-based applications to production. Please give the latest version a try, and do let us
know about any feedback on [Discord](https://discord.gg/VtX2gw9Rug)!
