---
slug: "kuzu-0.11.0-release"
title: "Kuzu 0.11.0 Release"
description: "Release announcement for Kuzu 0.11.0"
pubDate: "July 7 2025"
heroImage: "/img/default.png"
categories: ["release"]
authors: ["team"]
tags: ["cypher"]
---

Opening

## Single file database

Starting from v0.11.0, Kuzu switches to a single-file format. A Kuzu database is now a file that can be moved or shared easily.
This single-file design has been adopted in other embedded database systems, such as DuckDB and SQLite.

@prashanth we should mention this may break changes for user and what they should pay attention to.

## Vector & Full-text-search index

### Mutable indices

Kuzu now support multable vector index and full-text-search index. Once indices are defined on a table, any insertion and deletion
on the table will automatically trigger a change in related indices. Insertion includes both create statement and copy statement.

### Vector filtered search with arbitrary cypher query

In v0.10, we release vector filtered search with simple predicate on single table. This release generalizes the predicate to be
arbitrary cypher query. Consider the following `Book-PublishdBy->Publisher` graph and a vector index on `Book` table.

```sql
CREATE NODE TABLE Book(id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY, title STRING, title_embedding FLOAT[384]);
CREATE NODE TABLE Publisher(name STRING PRIMARY KEY);
CREATE REL TABLE PublishedBy(FROM Book TO Publisher);
CALL CREATE_VECTOR_INDEX(
    'Book', -- table name
    'book_title_index', -- index name 
    'title_embedding' -- property name
);
```

To search among the set of books from a certain publisher, e.g. `Pearson`, user simply need to define these books through a cypher query with `project_graph_cypher` and use the projected graph in vector index searching.

```sql
CREATE project_graph_cypher(
    'pearson_book',   -- graph name
    'MATCH (b:Book)-[:PublishedBy]->(p:Publisher {name:'Pearson'}) RETURN b' -- cypher query
)
CALL QUERY_VECTOR_INDEX(
    'filtered_book', -- graph name
    'book_title_index', -- index name
    create_embedding('quantum world', 'open-ai', 'text-embedding-3-small', 384), -- input vector
    2 -- top K
)
```

### Full-text-search performance improvement

We have improved the top-K search performance on fts index. The table below shows the search performance of finding top 10

| # threads | 1 | 2 | 4 | 8 |
|------|------|------|------|------|
|  v0.10   |  B   |  C   |  D   |  E   |
|  v0.11   |  G   |  H   |  I   |  J   |


## Emebedding extension

We introduce a new extension that can create text embeddings through the following providers 

* [OpenAI](https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/embeddings)
* [Amazon Bedrock](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/bedrock/latest/userguide/titan-embedding-models.html)
* [Google Vertex](https://cloud.google.com/vertex-ai/generative-ai/docs/embeddings/get-text-embeddings)
* [Google Gemini](https://ai.google.dev/gemini-api/docs/embeddings)
* [Voyage AI](https://docs.voyageai.com/docs/embeddings)
* [Ollama](https://ollama.com/blog/embedding-models)

@prashanth I believe the example should be a combination of vector search & create embedding.

## Azure 

@prashanth I prefer not mentioning this in the post because it's not a complete feature.

## Swift API

Kuzu now runs on apple devices through our Swift API. This aligns with our vision of running everywhere as embedded graph database.

(Maybe) Stay tuned for our blog post of running Kuzu on iPhone?

## Other Cypher features

### Create table as

@xiyang complete

### Alter relationship table add/drop connection

@xiyang complete

