---
slug: "kuzu-0.9.0-release"
title: "Kuzu 0.9.0 Release"
description: "Release announcement for Kuzu 0.9.0"
pubDate: "Mar 31 2025"
heroImage: "/img/default.png"
categories: ["release"]
authors: ["team"]
tags: ["cypher"]
---


## New Features

### Vector Index

There is an increasing demand for vector indices and vector-based search in databases in order to power modern predictive applications. In this release, we annouce a native vector extension that provides an on-disk [hiearchical navigable small world](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hierarchical_navigable_small_world) (HNSW) vector index. A simple example of how to use the vector index is shown below:

```python
# This should be the same example we have on the document.
```

#### Combine with Cypher Pattern Matching

Since the vector index is a native extension, it can be combined with Cypher pattern matching to perform advanced search. For example,

```python
# Carry on with the example
```

#### Filtered Search

It is also possible to perform vector search on a subset of records (filter search). To perform a filtered search, first you need to define the filter through a projected graph with the following syntax:

```cypher
CALL CREATE_PROJECTED_GRAPH(
    'projected_graph_name', // Name of the projected graph
    {                      // Node tables to project
        'table_name': {
            'filter': 'predicate' // Optional predicate to filter nodes
        }
    },
    [                      // Relationship tables to project
        'table_name'
    ]
);
``` 

A projected graph is a subgraph (i.e., a subset of the original graph) that contains only the nodes and relationships that match the given table names and predicates. The definition involves relationships because we will use the same concept to perform graph algorithms, e.g. page rank in the future. In the context of vector search, the projected graph is limited to single node table with filter. 

```python
# Carry on with the example
```

#### Performance

Although the index is on disk, the creation and query performance is on-par with in-memory indices. 

``` python
# show benchamark
```

### Scan from Postgres with arbitrary SQL statements

In previous release, we introduced the [Postgres extension](https://docs.kuzudb.com/extensions/attach/rdbms/) which enabled scanning from PostgreSQL tables. This release further extends the capability with `SQL_QUERY` function, allowing users to execute arbitrary read-only SQL queries on attached PostgreSQL databases and retrieve the query result in kuzu.

Below shows an example of 
```sql
-- Attach a Postgres database
ATTACH 'dbname=university user=postgres host=localhost password=yourpassword port=5432' AS uw (dbtype postgres);
-- Scan from a Postgres query
CALL SQL_QUERY('uw', 'SELECT id, name, age FROM person WHERE age > 20') RETURN *;
-- Bulk insert from a Postgres query
CREATE NODE TABLE person(id INT PRIMARY KEY, name STRING, age INT);
COPY person FROM SQL_QUERY('uw', 'SELECT id, name, age FROM person WHERE age > 20');
```

### WASM with bundled extensions

In v0.8.0 we release a WebAssembly (WASM) version of Kuzu. One of the limitations of the WASM version was that it did not support extensions. This release ships a WASM version with several bundled extensions through static linking. The bundled extensions are
- Full-text search (fts)
- Json (json)
- Vector Index (vector)

## APIs and Ecosystem Integrations

### New Sync and Async APIs

Kuzu now provides both synchronous and asynchronous APIs for Python and Node.js bindings. For Python, synchronous API is the default choice while asynchronous API can be used in web frameworks like FastAPI. For Node.js, the asynchronous API is commonly used.


### Unity Catalog

### MCP

### Gdotv

## Performance Improvements

### Aggregation

Our team has been consistently focusing on improving query performance. In this release, we announce a major improvement on aggregation workloads, including distinct, hash aggregate and aggregate on distinct values. The performance again mainly comes from vectorizing computation and paralleling the final aggregation stage. We will present technical details in a separate blog post.

```
Show benchmark
```


### Full-text search index creation

The performance of index creationg is also improved in this release. The following benchmark is conducted using `ms-passage` dataset with 8.8M documents that take 2.9GB in raw size and on a machine with 2 AMD EPYC 7551 CPUs with 64 cores and 409GB of memory. The result is shown as follows:

| v0.8.0 | v0.9.0 | Speedup |
|--------|--------| ------- |
| 460s   | 108s   | **4.3x**    |

